# Sources

The Evolving Role of the Radiologist within the Health Care
System
Paul Martin Knechtges, MD and
University of Michigan Hospital
Ruth C Carlos, MD, MS
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2600889/pdf/nihms30190.pdf

Sub-Specialties
While radiology is already a specialty of medicine, you might choose to sub-specialize in a particular area of the field. Radiology sub-specialists may focus on a certain disease or illness, treatment type, patient demographic, or area of the body. Common sub-specialties include:

Emergency radiology
Pediatric radiology
Breast imaging
Radiation oncology
Chest radiology
Neuroradiology


Job Duties and Tasks for: "Radiologist"
1) Supervise and teach residents or medical students.
2) Schedule examinations and assign radiologic personnel.
3) Participate in continuing education activities to maintain and develop expertise.
4) Implement protocols in areas such as drugs, resuscitation, emergencies, power failures, and infection control.
5) Serve as an offsite teleradiologist for facilities that do not have on-site radiologists.
6) Provide advice on types or quantities of radiology equipment needed to maintain facilities.
7) Participate in research projects involving radiology.
8) Treat malignant internal or external growths by exposure to radiation from radiographs (x-rays), high energy sources, or natural or synthetic radioisotopes.
9) Participate in quality improvement activities including discussions of areas where risk of error is high.
10) Develop treatment plans for radiology patients.
11) Establish or enforce standards for protection of patients or personnel.
12) Administer radiopaque substances by injection, orally, or as enemas to render internal structures and organs visible on x-ray films or fluoroscopic screens.
13) Administer or maintain conscious sedation during and after procedures.
14) Review or transmit images and information using picture archiving or communications systems.
15) Interpret images using computer-aided detection or diagnosis systems.
16) Recognize or treat complications during and after procedures, including blood pressure problems, pain, oversedation, or bleeding.
17) Prepare comprehensive interpretive reports of findings.
18) Obtain patients' histories from electronic records, patient interviews, dictated reports, or by communicating with referring clinicians.
19) Conduct physical examinations to inform decisions about appropriate procedures.
20) Confer with medical professionals regarding image-based diagnoses.
21) Instruct radiologic staff in desired techniques, positions, or projections.
22) Evaluate medical information to determine patients' risk factors, such as allergies to contrast agents, or to make decisions regarding the appropriateness of procedures.
23) Document the performance, interpretation, or outcomes of all procedures performed.
24) Develop or monitor procedures to ensure adequate quality control of images.
25) Coordinate radiological services with other medical activities.
26) Provide counseling to radiologic patients to explain the processes, risks, benefits, or alternative treatments.
27) Communicate examination results or diagnostic information to referring physicians, patients, or families.
28) Perform interventional procedures such as image-guided biopsy, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty, transhepatic biliary drainage, and nephrostomy catheter placement.
29) Perform or interpret the outcomes of diagnostic imaging procedures including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computer tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET), nuclear cardiology treadmill studies, mammography, or ultrasound.
